i love to take down notes while watching movies
the name of the current movie that i am watching is]
escape from alkatraz
its an 1979 movie 
director Don Seigel
client eastwood actor


the movie start with the scene 
where a prisoner is being taken into 
a prison which is in a remote island

He is put into the prizon ,cleaned and given uniform

Next scene starts where a group of police office 
come an their commander commands all the prisoner 
to be ready for the breakfast.
All the prisoners come out of their cells and 
move to the dining hall in a queue.



after the breakfast the prisoner of the first 
scene was called upon by the incharge of the prison

after the briefing the main character moves.


The next scene starts in  a bathroom where all the 
prisoners are naked and taking bath.

there was a small fight between the main character 
and another prisoner.

the main charecter then takes some magazine and books from the library and deliver those to the priso
prisoners with a trolley in the next scene.

Next scene starts in a basketball field where 
a person was painting ,then he went to a niger 
and sit next to him .They talked about never 
making out of the prison 

next scene inside the cell main character talked 
to a police officer

Another day again in the basket ball field,
the man from the bathroom scene approaches the main character and attacks with knife.policemen intervaned and putthem into dark cells.

The main character was punished with water canaon\

he was taken out of the cell in the next scene 
and taken to his normal cell.

Launch time comes police man commands scene ends,
small talks in the ground in the next scene 

next scene shows the incharge seeing his painting
made by one of the prisoner and all his paintings were removed by his order .

next scene policeman practicing shooting .Doc(painter prisoner) was upset as his paintings and canvas was taken away.

Doc took an exe from the carpentry shop and cut his fingers.Police men took control and make other prisoners back to work.

Main char was also upset too.next scene again in the cell main char talking to the niger .


next scene
Prisoners taking breakfast ,main char talked to the incharge.
they eat go back to their cell

next scene in the cell main char saw a cockroach coming into and out of the cell

next scene again the ground small talks.then few prisoners talked over the phone with their family those have come to meet them .

next scene charlie ,the person in the next cell to 
the main char talked to him about getting out of here

next scene in the dining ,main char tellling about getting a way out of the prison.

main char switched off the light and start digging near the net in his cell through which the cockroach
came 

next scene ,next day in the breakfast he steals a spoon next scene niger comes to distribute magazine.

Main char (frak) took some match sticks from charlie 
break the spoon took a nail cutter and fabricated
a weapon and starts digging , a police officer coemes but charle signals before he arrives  .

next scene ,the carpanters workshop ,frank succeeds stealing another small cutting tool and continued digging in his cell and finally removed the net 
he gave it to charle to remove his net and keeps an eye on the guards with a mirror.

then he slowly prepared a mask with the clay ,put it on the bed ,coved it with the blanket and went out of the window from which the net was removed took a good look and comes back to the cell.

next scene in the dining takling continues ,next night charlie and frank went out of their cells and inspect the vantilator duct ,next scene some prisoners playing music.

next scene nighttime frank and charlie working near the duct ,they bend one of the rod covering the duct entrance

next scene dining hall talking continues ,incharge of the prison came ,one man dies of heaart attack.

next scene niger comes to distribute magazine.
person incharge of the cell comes in to the cell and checked it  

finally one night they escaped the prison( except charlie) and went though a boat prepared with rain coat.

The next morning there waas a search  ,the police assumed they drowned but no body was found yet ,its still a mistry .

The movie is  based on a true story.





